Reworded 42I18 (#489)
neo4j/docs-status-codes: modules/ROOT/pages/errors/gql-errors/42I18.adoc

= 42I18

== Status description

> error: syntax error or access rule violation - reference to non-grouping sub-expression. The expression contains non-grouping sub-expression `{ <<variableList>> }`. In an aggregating context only grouping sub-expressions and constants are allowed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
error: syntax error or access rule violation - reference to non-grouping sub-expression. The expression contains a non-grouping sub-expression `{ <<variableList>> }`. In an aggregating context, only grouping sub-expressions and constants are allowed.
```

== Explanation
An aggregating expression can only consist of grouping sub-expressions and constants.
A reference outside of this set is not possible to unambiguously aggregate over.

== Example scenario

> For example, the following query projects `a.name` as a grouping key but then references the non-grouped variable `a` inside a map together with a collect(...) aggregation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following query projects `a.name` as a grouping key but then references the non-grouped variable `a` inside a map together with a `collect(...)` aggregation:
```

[source,cypher]
----

> MATCH (a {name: 'Andres'})<-[:FATHER]-(child)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MATCH (a {name: 'Andres'})<-[:HAS_FATHER]-(child)
```

RETURN a.name, {foo: a.partner = 'Andres', kids: collect(child.name)}
----

An error will be thrown with GQLSTATUS 42I18 and the following status description:

[source]
----

> error: syntax error or access rule violation - reference to non-grouping sub-expression. The expression contains non-grouping sub-expression `a`. In an aggregating context only grouping sub-expressions and constants are allowed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
error: syntax error or access rule violation - reference to non-grouping sub-expression. The expression contains a non-grouping sub-expression `a`. In an aggregating context, only grouping sub-expressions and constants are allowed.
```

----

== Possible solutions

> To resolve this issue, you can add the non-grouping expression as a grouping key. Observe this may change the result.

Reviewer: I am not sure I understand "Observe this may change the result."
Do you mean "Be aware/note that this may change the result."?

Author: If you change what is grouped on that may change the result of the query. So it is a intended as a warning.

> To resolve this issue, you can add the non-grouping expression as a grouping key. Observe this may change the result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To resolve this issue, you can add the non-grouping expression as a grouping key.
Be aware that this may change the result.
```

[source,cypher]
----

> MATCH (a {name: 'Andres'})<-[:FATHER]-(child)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MATCH (a {name: 'Andres'})<-[:HAS_FATHER]-(child)
```

RETURN a.name, a.partner, {foo: a.partner = 'Andres', kids: collect(child.name)}
----

> Alternatively, add the missing variable, `a`, as its own grouping key:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can add the missing variable `a` as a grouping key on its own.
```

= 42I18

== Status description
error: syntax error or access rule violation - reference to non-grouping sub-expression. The expression contains a non-grouping sub-expression `{ <<variableList>> }`. In an aggregating context, only grouping sub-expressions and constants are allowed.

== Explanation
An aggregating expression can only consist of grouping sub-expressions and constants.

> A reference outside of this set is not possible to unambiguously aggregate over.

Reviewer 2: "aggregate over" sounds like the reference is what will get aggregated. Only the argument of the aggregate function gets aggregated. This error is about variables outside the aggregation function. These have be known to be equal for all rows of the group. 

Also an aggregating expression can also consist of aggregate functions. 

Here is a stab at a rewording:

```suggestion
An aggregating expression can only consist of grouping sub-expressions, constants, and aggregate functions.
A variable that are neither sub-expressions nor constants nor arguments to an aggregate function cannot be use in an aggregating expression.

To be usable in an aggregating expression, the variables need to be a) aggregated or b) single-valued per group regardless of the queried graph. Grouping sub-expressions and constants are guaranteed to be single-valued per group. In contrast, variables that are neither a grouping sub-expressions nor a constants may have multiple values per group.
```

The first paragraph provides the rule that got violated. The second paragraph is meant to give some explanation about why the rule is as it is. Hence, the second paragraph is not strictly needed in case we think it is not helpful.

Author: Great!

= 42I18

== Status description
error: syntax error or access rule violation - reference to non-grouping sub-expression. The expression contains a non-grouping sub-expression `{ <<variableList>> }`. In an aggregating context, only grouping sub-expressions and constants are allowed.

== Explanation
An aggregating expression can only consist of grouping sub-expressions, constants, and aggregate functions.

> A variable that are neither sub-expressions nor constants nor arguments to an aggregate function cannot be use in an aggregating expression.

Reviewer: either
```suggestion
A variable that is not a sub-expression, a constant, or an argument to an aggregate function cannot be used in an aggregating expression.
```
or

```suggestion
Variables that are not sub-expressions, constants, or arguments to an aggregate function cannot be used in an aggregating expression.
```

> To be usable in an aggregating expression, the variables need to be a) aggregated or b) single-valued per group regardless of the queried graph. Grouping sub-expressions and constants are guaranteed to be single-valued per group. In contrast, variables that are neither a grouping sub-expressions nor a constants may have multiple values per group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be usable in an aggregating expression, variables must be either aggregated or single-valued per group, regardless of the queried graph. 
Grouping sub-expressions and constants ensures that each group is single-valued.
In contrast, variables that are neither a grouping sub-expression nor a constant may have multiple values per group.
```
